cavalry
new technologies make empires possible
improved logistics
central control
the story of the next several millennia is that of empires.
as centralized empires grow, monotheism grows. judaism, christianity, islam, bhudism, hinduism. all major religions are rooted in this era.
the rise of the himmilayas 50 million years earlier blocks the Eastern world from the Western world. 100 BC, a chinese empire sends an envoy West in search of trade alliances. This voyage lays the path for the Silk Road, a massive trade network that will connect the two sides of the world for the next thousand years.
But while this network gives rise to unprecedented exchange, it also gives rise to the most deadly threat in human history: diseases such as plague. Some historians link these diseases to the fall of two largest empires, that is the Roman Empire and the Han Dynasty.
2,3,the common era.
312,ad,Fighting on the Bospherous separating Europe from Asia, the Roman Emperor Constantine converts to Christianity, setting the stage for Europe's intense history with the Christian religion.
for a brief time, islam will rule a territory 2.5 times larger than the Roman Empire ever was.
Across the Sahara Desert, arabic trade with large camel caravans moves elements like Salt into Europe, and in the process opens the first African states. With their critical position between the Eastern and Western worlds, the arabics facilitate trade. To Europe they bring salf from Africa and rice from Asia, as well as a huge number of other food crops such as lemon, citrus, and coffee. The arabics also transport crucial inventions across the world, such as that of paper, and the Arabic numerals that define our counting system. Globalization has arrived. It is age of the Arabs.
In this time, a Chinese alchemist stumbles upon the recipe for gunpowder. The recipe travels across the Silk Road and is used by the Arabs to fire cannon balls at Christian crusaders. Europeans adopt the idea and refine it to yield bullets and guns.
500,ya, in Americas there are now civilization of Aztecs, Mayans, and Incas. Europe has cracked like an egg into individual states.
1492,ad, columbus connects the two sides of the world that have been separated for tens of thousands of years. Prior to this expedition, these two worlds were so isolated it was as if they existed on different planets.
Suddenly the center of power shifts from the Arabs in the center of Europe and Asia, to the Europeans in the center of the New World and the rest of the world. This is a game changer, and marks the rise of the West.
Corn from the Americas appears in Egypt. The potatoes of the Andes proof perfectly suitable for the soils of Ireland. The ancient grains of Fertile Crescent such as wheat begin to spread across the Americas.
Within three centuries of Columbus's voyage connecting the New and Old Worlds, the world's population more than doubles.
Conquistadors come to the Americas bering guns, riding horses, and carrying infectious diseases. Slaughter of the Native Americans ensures. With guns and germs, the pioneers wipe out 95% of the native population.
The story of sugar. Chemically, the only fuel for our brains. Though first cultivated in Asia six thousand years earlier, the Europeans discovered the sugarcane grass while fighting in the Crusades. Europe soon became obsessed with this new crop and saw enormous potential for cultivating it in the New World. This brings the age of plantations and slavery.
300,ya,1700 humanity hits a wall, living simple lives like ancient ancestors. small scale subsistence agriculture. manufacturing restricted to small workshops. all because this is the most economical way to work given that work must be done by the human hand. At this time it takes longer for information to circle the planet than it takes us today to reach Mars. progess is stalled.
as coal becomes a new source of fuel and miners dig deeper into the Earth, water begins flooding the mines. This challenge becomes severe enough that some kind of water pump becomes desperately needed, giving rise to the first practical steam engine, powered by coal itself. This spectacular combination of coal with a steam engine that fuels the Industrial Revolution.
this revolution comes with political revolutions in American and France.
trains thunder across the America's country side. 1870s internal combustion engine, and Germans invent the automobile. Oil becomes the most demanded commodity on the planet. With automobiles transporting people and goods faster than ever before, the telegraph and telephone do likewise for information. Electricity becomes available. with these inventions, warfare gets radically amplified.
within the 19th century, the world's population nearly quadruples.